Our planet, earth, is occupied by diverse kinds of living organisms.
They live in various environments. The world is estimated to have 5 to 30
million species of living organisms. At present about 2.5 million species of
living organisms have been given scientific names. Over 1.5 million of them
are animal species and out of which 750,000 belong to insect species alone.
There are 350,000 species of plants including algae, fungi, mosses and higher
forms of plants. Thus the existence of different forms of a species or genus
and diverse adaptations for, varied surroundings are referred to as “biodiversity”.

The survival of such a vast range of living beings could be ensured
only  when  their  habitats  and  environmental  conditions  remain  without
alterations. The term ‘biosphere’ had been coined to highlight the interde-
pendence of living and non-living world. It represents a stable environment of
various physical and biological factors which have been operating since the
past. The organic continuity of the system rests on a delicate network of inter-
dependent relationships. The air, the water, the animals, the plants, the mi-
crobes and human beings are all interlinked in a life sustaining system, called
the  environment.

today.  The  nations  of 
Safeguarding the entire biosphere with all its intricacies is of prime
importance 
the  world  have  convened
several conferences and adopted important resolutions for safeguarding the
sustainability of earth. In this background, the United Nation’s ‘Environmental
Agency’ organised the “International Conference on Human Environment” at
Stockholm in 1972. This conference adopted the motto ‘Only one earth’. In
1982, a UN conference on Environment was held at Nairobi. The UN again
convened  “Earth  summit”  at  Rio  de  Janeiro  highlighting  “our
common  future”,  in  1992.  Once  again  a  world  summit  on  sustainable
development  was  organised  in  Johannesberg  in  2002.  One  of  the  agenda
commonly  placed  and  accepted  in  all  these  meets  was  the  significance  of
biodiversity and its conservation to ensure sustainable earth.
Biodiversity in India

India’s immense biological diversity represents about 7% of world’s
flora and 6.5% of world’s fauna. About 62 % animals in India are endemic to
the  country.  India  is  one  of  the  12  countries  identified  as  mega  centres  of
biological diversity.